---
title: "Formulating an Engineering Framework for Future AI Certification in Aviation"
collection: publications
category: manuscripts
permalink: /publication/2025-05-28-Formulating-an-Engineering-Framework-for-Future-AI-Certification-in-Aviation
excerpt: "AI's growing role in aviation challenges traditional development models like the V-model. To address this, EASA introduced the W-shaped process, tailored for AI system certification. This article proposes enhancing the W-shaped model by integrating DevOps principles for continuous iteration and improvement. The approach aligns with G34/WG-114 standardization efforts and supports ongoing re-evaluation of AI components using operational data, enabling iterative system enhancements and addressing aviation-specific AI engineering needs."
date: 2025-05-28
venue: "Aerospace"
paperurl: "https://doi.org/10.3390/aerospace12060482"
slidesurl: # URL to slides pdf
citation: "<b>Christensen, J. M.</b>, Stefani, T., Anilkumar Girija, A., Hoemann, E., Vogt, A., Werbilo, V., Durak, U., K&ouml;ster, F., Kr&uuml;ger, T. and Hallerbach, S. &quot;Formulating an Engineering Framework for Future AI Certification in Aviation&quot;, in <i>Aerospace</i>, May 2025."
---
A continuous increase in artificial intelligence (AI)-based functions can be expected for future aviation systems, posing significant challenges to traditional development processes. Established systems engineering frameworks, such as the V-model, are not adequately addressing the novel challenges associated with AI-based systems. Consequently, the European Union Aviation Safety Agency (EASA) introduced the W-shaped process, an advancement of the V-model, to set a regulatory framework for the novel challenges of AI Engineering. In contrast, the agile Development Operations (DevOps) approach, widely adopted in software development, promotes a never-ending iterative development process. This article proposes a novel concept that integrates aspects of DevOps into the W-shaped process to create an AI Engineering framework suitable for aviation-specific applications. Furthermore, it builds upon proven ideas and methods using AI Engineering efforts from other domains. The proposed extension of the W-shaped process, compatible with ongoing standardizations from the G34/WG-114 Standardization Working Group, a joint effort between EUROCAE and SAE, addresses the need for a rigorous development process for AI-based systems while acknowledging its limitations and potential for future advancements. The proposed framework allows for a re-evaluation of the AI/ML constituent based on operational information, enabling improvements of the system’s capabilities with each iteration.
